Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
the Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopez,
and today I'm joined by Doctor Daniel Fessler. He
is professor of biological anthropology at the University of
California, Los Angeles. And today, we're talking about topics
like physical formidability, male muscularity, moral parochialism, and moral
condemnation. Discussed an ideology and some other related topics.
So Doctor Fessler, welcome to the show. It's a
pleasure to everyone.
Thank you. Thanks for having me.
So, let's start with the topic of physical formidability.
Uh, TO start off with what is physical formidability
and how do you study it?
So, uh, all we mean by physical formidability is,
um, uh, which of two individuals would win a
fight, um, when the only factors. Involve their physical
aspects. So across many, many species, the principal determinant
of this kind of winning feature is simply physical
size. Big animals win fights with small animals, um,
and of course we're talking about fights within a
species rather than predation events or such. And the
second is strength, um, and, uh, strength is evident
in the physical features of an individual, um, in
a variety of ways, uh, in different species and
humans, of course, um, in addition to physical size,
uh, muscularity is a principal determinant of that. But
importantly, um, Uh, when we study physical formidability, we're
not actually studying who would win a fight based
on those physical characteristics. Uh, INSTEAD, um, our reasoning,
and this is work done with uh Professor Colin
Holbrook at uh University of California, Merced and quite
a number of other colleagues, um, uh, our reasoning
is as follows, um. Any organism that has minimal
social cognition abilities, the ability to assess other members
of its species, should be able to gauge in
advance what its odds are of winning a conflict,
a physical conflict with a conspecific. So, um, you
know, if two crabs come together and they're having
a fight, they may wave their claws at each
other as an indication of, um, what their respective
fighting capacities are, and, and often those fights don't
occur because the individual who assesses themselves is likely
to lose will back off, right? And um both
individuals are benefited by the ability to assess the
probability of winning or losing. When we study physical
formidability, we're not actually interested at all in the
physical features of individuals. Instead, we reason that the
ability to make those kinds of judgments to determine
what one's odds of winning a conflict are, must
be an evolutionarily ancient feature of social cognition, right?
And as a consequence, there must be representations in
the mind. That allow individuals to store an assessment
of who's likely to win. And because size and
strength are evolutionarily ancient dimensions of the determinant of
who's going to win, we theorize that those are
the dimensions that that representation takes. So, as a
consequence, um, in, you know, human social cognition, when
individuals are assessing one another's formidability, they're using a
representation of size and strength, even though those may
not actually be the things that determine who wins
a conflict. The person who has a gun wins
against the person who doesn't, um, irrespective of how
large um or muscular either party is. But we've
been able to show that. It is those dimensions,
size and strength, that represent an assessment of all
of the factors that lead to um uh uh
who is likely to win a conflict.
Uh, AND what kinds of cues do people pay
attention to when assessing physical formidability?
Well, as I said, um, although other many other
scholars have studied things like how Actual physical fighting
capacity is gauged, you know, how people gauge muscularity
or levels of of male hormones and so on.
That's not actually what we're studying. Instead, we're studying
the cognition that uses that representation. So, any Any
tactical asset or liability is summarized with a representation
in the mind. You can think of it as
a little picture in the mind, the mind's eye
image of um. Of who is likely to win
the fight. So, uh, our very first experiment, um,
uh, Professor Holbrook's in mind, um, just looked at,
if you see hands holding objects, some of which
are weapons and some of which are not, um,
and you're asked to gauge how big do you
think the person attached to that hand is. If
the object is a weapon, people think that the
person is bigger. Now, of course, that that that.
You know, empirically, there is no correlation, and in
fact, we tested this just to make sure. There's
no corre it's not that gun owners are larger
than non-gun owners or anything like that, right? So
why do people think someone is bigger if they're
holding a gun? The answer is because it is
those dimensions of size and strength that people use
when they summarize all of the tactical assets and
liabilities. So having a gun is a huge tactical
asset, right? If someone has a gun, they just
seem larger in our imagination.
And does the presence of comrades decrease the perceived
physical formidability of opponents or not?
Yes, yes, absolutely. So the way that we gauge
um these, you know, assessments is by presenting people
with stimuli, sometimes scenarios, sometimes vignettes, um, uh, other
times just images like photographs of hands holding objects,
right? Um, AND we asked them to assess how
big and muscular they think the other person is,
a potential antagonist, right? We did a series of
experiments where um we stopped, uh, passersby on the
street and um asked them to gauge a potential
antagonist. In this case, it was a uh uh
uh an individual who was incarcerated on terrorism charges,
um. Very threatening looking person to the average American,
um, uh, and, um, uh, when told, you know,
this is a terrorist, um, and what we found
is if we Stop, uh, a young man who's
walking in a group of men. And if we
ask that individual to step away from his friends,
isolate him at a physical distance behind a visual
barrier where he cannot see his friends, and ask
him to gauge how big and strong that terrorist
is, OK. And we compare that to the same
assessments made by an individual who's allowed to stand
near his friends while walking down the street. What
we find is that the individual who is isolated
from his friends, assesses the potential antagonist as physically
larger and stronger than the individual who is near
his friends. And presumably this is because, um, not
only in the contemporary world, but, you know, uh
long before our species, having the presence of allies.
WAS a pri principal tactical asset. So when individuals
know that they have backing, as it were, they
see a potential antagonist as less threatening, and as
a consequence, as less large and muscular.
And this physical formidability also assessed in women and
if so,
how? Again, um, we're not talking about asking how
large and strong a woman actually is. Instead, we're
talking about asking, is the same representational system used
in assessing women that is used in assessing men.
Now, we don't have a, a, an enormous amount
of um of data on this because we really
only ran um, one set of studies targeting specifically
women in this regard, but the answer is yes.
And that's really not. Surprising because uh we think
this cognitive representational system long predates humans, right? And,
and, and, and females have conflicts with females, women
have conflict with women. Um, THERE'S no reason to
think that the that the, the mind's eye image,
as it were, would be any different on the
basis of the, the sex of the individual. And,
and, you know, as I said, we don't have
extensive evidence, but what evidence we have says yes,
that's absolutely true.
There's something like nonviolent physical risk taking play a
role here.
It does, it does. So, um, uh, there is
extensive evidence both within um societies of the global
north and, and, um, uh, certainly plenty of ethnographic
evidence and some quantitative evidence from societies outside the
global North that men take more risks with their
uh their physical well-being. Um. Voluntary risks, um, including
in nonviolent contests, right? Or, or, or, or contexts,
both contests and contexts. Um, uh, SOME of these
are recreational activities, right? So, um, choose a dangerous
sport. Um, uh, MEN are more likely to engage
in that than women are. Um, WE see this
in, you know, um, uh, initiation rituals in small
scale societies where, where, where men's rituals are often
much more, um, uh, physically demanding and risky than
than women's are and so on, right? And we
see an an age distribution where young men are
more likely to um uh to take these risks,
these voluntary. Risks with their physical well-being outside of
violent contexts than um than older men are or
than women are and so on, right? And this
is represented in, you know, things like motorcycle ownership
or emergency room admissions for, you know, accidental injuries,
right? Um. You know, uh, here in the United
States, if you, if you buy a ladder at
a hardware store, there's a, there's a sticker on
the top step of the ladder saying this is
not a step. Don't stand here, right? And yet
young men fall off ladders much more than than
other demographics do. OK. So, so there's, you know,
there's just abundant evidence that, um, uh, that men
take more risks with their physical well-being than women
do, and uh that young. MEN take more than
older men do. Now, um, uh, quite a number
of years ago, the, the, the eminent evolutionary psychologists,
Margot Wilson and Martin Daly pointed out that this
pattern of risk taking is connected to patterns of
violent conflict and that men are more likely to
um uh to be involved in violent altercations all
the way up to homicide. Um, uh, AND, uh,
that young men in particular are at risk in
this regard, and, and their argument, uh, which I
think is a compelling one, is that this is
a reflection of, of intersexual selection, that is, uh,
selection on men for competition to access to reproductive
partners, which explains the differences in body size and
muscularity between males and females in our species and,
and many others. Um, AND, uh, they largely conceptualized
this voluntary risk taking, um, demographic pattern as uh
just a a kind of, uh, a reflection of
or an ancillary, um, perhaps knock-on effect of this
propensity to engage in violent conflict, um. We extended
that perspective by arguing that voluntary physical risk taking
outside a violent con contexts actually has signaling value,
right? Because an individual who is willing to take
significant risks with their physical well-being is indicating to
others that they are a dangerous opponent and a
valuable ally. If someone doesn't back down, even when
it's clear that there is a risk of injury
or death in a conflict. That person is just
much more difficult to deter from engaging in the
conflict, and much more difficult to defeat because they
don't, um, they don't retreat, right? Um, uh, FANS
of, uh, the British comedy troupe Monty Python may
remember, uh, the night guarding the bridge, right, where,
you know, he's he's suffering these, these horrible injuries
at the hands of his opponent, and he just
refuses to back down, right? Um, THAT, that is
someone now in that case that individual was defeated.
OF course, but, but the point here is that,
that, that's somebody who's a dangerous opponent, right? It's,
it's just much more difficult um to deter or
defeat them, and a valuable ally, you want that
person on your side. So our argument very simply
is that voluntary nonviolent risk taking, which follows the
same demographic patterns as um engagement and violence is
a way of communicating to potential um opponents and
to potential allies that one is, uh, you know,
a dangerous individual to go up against. Uh, AND,
um, in the same kinds of experiments that I
described with regard, for example, to the possession of
weapons or the presence of allies, um, we show
that if you know that someone, uh, involuntarily engages
in recreational activities that are highly risky, you think
that person in your mind's eye, right? You think
of them as larger and stronger than if they
avoid such activities. And of course, again, it isn't
physically actually the case that big strong People take
more, you know, risks bungee jumping or base jumping,
or, you know, rock climbing or ice climbing or
whatever. Physical size doesn't actually play a role in
people's decisions about their own recreational risk taking. And
yet, when asked to imagine a recreational risk taker,
people think of that individual as bigger and stronger
because they're using that information, they're they're they're, they're
um. They're processing the signal that that individual is
emitting through their actions, uh, and they're they're using
that information to assess the overall likelihood that that
individual would win a conflict.
Right. So let me ask you now about male
muscularity and particularly preferences for male mus muscularity. So
when it comes to these kinds of preferences, do
they differ between men's and women's magazines?
Yeah, so, um, uh, uh, this is not a
a a subject that I've studied extensively. Um, uh,
uh, uh, THERE was one project quite a number
of years ago headed up by uh Professor David
Frederick, um, uh, and, um, we compared the degree
of muscularity of images, uh, of men in magazines
aimed at a male audience in the United States.
AND magazines aimed at um a female audience. I
should say, by the way, that when I make
these kinds of generalizations, um, um. As in this
case, these are societies, so-called weird societies, right? Western
educated, industrialized, rich and democratic, right? um GLOBAL North
societies. um uh I I am uh. I'm an
anthropologist by training. I, I, you know, I, I
conducted ethnographic work in a small scale face to
face community in the global South. Um, I think
it's always important to contextualize our results and whenever
possible to, to, to conduct research across a wide
range of societies. So, so we want to take
this magazine study finding with a grain of salt,
right? Um, AND as I said, although other people
have continued such research, it's not something that I've
studied extensively, but the basic finding very simply is
that um. Uh, THE images of male bodies in
magazines aimed at men, uh, this largely predates the,
the, the, the, the, the current digital age when
the idea of a of a physical magazine is
somewhat antiquated, but I've been around for a while.
Um, uh, THE images in magazines aimed at a
male audience are more muscular than the images of
of men's bodies in magazines aimed at a female
audience, right? And um. There are a variety of
possible explanations here. Um, uh, ONE explanation possibly is
that, um, that there is prestige competition going on
between men. OK, so prestige competition, that is prestige,
of course, is a is a uniquely human aspect
of social structures. Um, ANY social animal with any
kind of complexity to its behavior has a hierarchy.
A pecking order, um, the phrase comes from, uh,
chickens, of course, not that chickens can speak, but
our studies of chickens, um, uh, and, um. Uh,
DOMINANCE hierarchies are very simply, um, you know, uh,
a social hierarchy um established on the basis of
force or the threat of force. And although dominance
hierarchies do play some role in human social groups,
um, uh, it's a fairly minor role in most
contexts in most societies. Instead, prestige is the principal,
um, means of, of assigning position in the social
hierarchy, and prestige in contrast to dominance has nothing
to do with force. Instead, it is freely granted
deference. Uh, INDIVIDUALS acknowledge that another individual has some
attribute that the group values, and um they provide
opportunities, um, uh, uh, they, they, um, verbally acknowledge
that individual, uh, and, um, uh, the, the sort
of compelling explanation for this, um, uh, work by
initially by Jerome Barkow and then subsequently by, um,
uh, Joseph Henri and Francisco Gil White argues that
the presence of prestige in human social. HIERARCHIES is
a consequence of the importance of acquiring information from
others. We are a culture dependent species, um, you
know, we're not particularly fast or big. We don't
have big teeth or large claws or so on.
Instead, um, uh, most of our success in, in,
in the world and our ability to dominate the
planet comes from the fact that we're good at
learning from other members of our species and, and
cultural information snowballs over time, right? There's cumulative cultural
evolution going on. So, um, if you identify somebody
in your group who is good at something, right,
um, uh, then you want to learn from them,
you want to imitate them, and the, the price
that you pay for access in a small group,
such that you can follow them around, ask them
questions, watch what they're doing, is to grant them
deference, OK? So, prestige exists in all human societies
and is the principal basis for human social hierarchies,
um, but Prestige can do a funny thing and
that it can go off in all kinds of
strange directions. Um, uh, CULTURES can choose anything in
potentially to be prestigious, right? Um, AND, uh, any
kind of social competition can turn into a, a
prestige competition. So one possible explanation for that difference
in muscularity preferences that I described is that men
are just engaging in a prestige competition, right? And
certainly you see this in their, you know, their
recreational activities, for example, right? They're just, they're they're
granting deference to individuals who are athletically skilled and
and and and willing to take risks and so
on, right? Um, uh, AND that prestige competition is
because it is men competing with men for prestige,
it's kind of gone into runaway where they have
escaped the female preferences as it were, right, or
overshot the female preferences. So the women don't actually
want, you know, You know, completely, you know, hypertrophied
muscular men, um, that's not their preference. The men
think that's great. Why do the men think that's
great? One possibility is prestige, right? Um, uh, uh,
ANOTHER possibility, of course, is that this is a
reflection of the history of violent conflict. Right? And
men are attending to attributes that might be useful
in violent conflict more than women are because um
uh it it is a a a more important
determinant of male status, independent of aspects of prestige.
At present, we can't really distinguish between these possibilities,
um, but, uh, going back to risk taking, you
see the same kind of overshooting often in risk
taking activities, right? So, um, You know, uh, it's
true that, you know, the presence of young women
precipitates or elicits more voluntary physical risk taking in
young men, but it's also true that the presence
of other young men is a huge risk factor.
Right, so here in Southern California, where I am,
um, uh, we have uh rattlesnakes in the in
in the hills, right? Is it a dangerous animal,
not, not, you know, enormously dangerous, but could certainly
can, you know, cause, um, severe damage to a
limb and, and in some cases even death, right?
And if we look at the epidemiology of rattlesnake
bites in Southern California, so who gets bitten by
rattlesnakes? Young men are much more likely to get
bitten by rattlesnakes than anybody else, OK. Now, it
could be the case that that's just cause they
spend more time outdoors and, you know, therefore they
encounter rattlesnakes more. But if we look more detailed
at Where people are getting bitten on their bodies,
when women get bitten by snakes, they're most likely
to be bitten on the foot or ankle or
lower leg. So they're just stepping someplace where there
happened to be a dangerous animal and they didn't
see it, and the snake bit them. Men are
often bitten on the hand, wrist, or forearm. OK.
Why? Because they're trying to pick up the snake,
right? When did they try and pick up the
snake? When there are other young men present, OK,
so this is this voluntary risk taking that I've
described. It is, it has the formidability component to
it, and it can go into runaway with prestige
where people, you know, oh, you know, this guy's,
you know what he's he's he's so brave, right?
Um, uh, THEY acknowledge this, um, uh, this risk
taking, and of course women don't think that's smart,
right, in general, they don't say, oh God, what,
you know, what. Smart guy, right? See, he'd be
a great life partner, you know, for, uh, you
know, a heterosexual woman, because he picks up rattlesnakes.
No, they think, what an idiot, right? This is
such a stupid thing to do. Why is he
picking up a rattlesnake? I should say, by the
way, that although it is a, uh, uh, only
a, a small fraction of the bite, some men
are bitten twice by the same snake. Right? So
they pick it up, it bites them, they say,
dude, it bit me and they don't let go
and it bites them again, right? OK, this is
not something in general that women admire. It just
seems like this is not the kind of person
you want to have as a partner because they're
not gonna be reliable, they're likely to end up
dead, right? Um, BUT the young men admire this,
and that's probably the intersection of dominance and prestige
operating in male male competition.
So, but I mean, when it comes to preferences
for male muscularity, and since I asked you also
about magazines, do men tend to overestimate the degree
of muscularity women prefer?
So I don't actually have data on this, but
I would, I I would venture to guess the
answer is yes, right? Um, uh, uh, SO they,
they, they, you know, at the gym, they're trying
to impress both other men and women, speaking of
course about heterosexual individuals, right, um, uh, uh, um,
uh, or predominantly heterosexual individuals, um, uh. Uh, BUT
we could do a whole another program on, um,
the attraction of members of the same sex and,
and, and my thoughts on that and um the
the the notion of heterosexuality is in fact, um,
uh, probably, uh, truly applicable to only a very
small fraction of any population. But, but I'll set
that aside for now and and and focus just
on this issue. Um, I, I, yeah, I think
that that men. Uh Grossly overestimate the extent to
which women value muscularity in a man, just like
they they they they grossly overestimate the extent to
which um physical risk taking um uh is valued
by women, right? Um, uh, SO, and that overestimation
is a consequence of Um, viewing it from a
male perspective, not from a female perspective. That is
the the the the guy, you know, taking steroids
and, and, and doing bench press in the gym,
you know, who can't put his arms down by
his side because his muscles are so hypertrophied, right?
Um, uh, HE isn't taking the perspective of the
female view of his body. Um, HE'S assuming that
they share his view, and his view is very
much driven by, um, uh comparison with other men
in, in competition with men. Um, THOSE are conjectures
on my part. I don't have evidence to support
that, but I'd be very surprised if that wasn't
the case.
OK, so it still related to that, could you
tell us about the physical trait overvaluation hypothesis and
how gender specific media fuel emphasis on certain body
parts in within gender prestige comp competitions. Yeah,
yeah, so, uh, so far, a lot of what
I have been saying could be, you know, the
uh the ideas could come from any evolutionary psychologist,
but, um, a place that I really think that
anthropology has a very important role to play in
the evolutionary social sciences is in um underscoring the
importance of cultural information and um I've mentioned culture
at various points, but haven't really, um, you know,
Uh, dwelled extensively on how cultural evolution can shape
preferences, um, and priorities in a wide variety of
directions. So, um, you know, when we look at
what is considered physically attractive, there are some universals,
and those have been well studied, um, by, you
know, a whole school of scholars, uh, and, and
the evidence is quite compelling, right? So, so, um.
Symmetry is more attractive than asymmetry, um, because symmetry
presumably is a reflection of genetic quality by virtue
of the fact that it's difficult to make something
s symmetrical, right? Um. Uh, SIGNS of vigor and
health are attractive in both sexes. Um, AGAIN, uh,
a, a reflection both of genetic quality and of,
um, the ability to, uh, perform the, the respective
functions in any partnership, right? Uh, AND, you know,
this work has been, as I said, quite extensive,
then there, there, there is also quite a bit
of work on, um, what we can think of
as sex specific aspects of bodies that um are
uh attractive. So, uh, in, in women, the waist
to hip ratio seems to be, um. Uh, EITHER
a first pass or second pass criterion depending on
the level of resource abundance. So, um, uh, when
there's, uh, uh, you know, a history of periodic
resource shortage, then it's a second pass criterion and
adiposity, general body fat is a first pass, right?
So people find more. Attractive women who have more
body fat because they're better buffered against um resource
scarcity. Uh, BUT the waist to hip ratio is,
is, um, uh, in, in those contexts is a
second pass criteria, people um uh value uh a
lower waist to hip ratio and, um, uh, uh.
Uh, A compelling argument has been made, um, by
Lasse Goin that, uh, this is a reflection of
the value of glu gluteofemoral fat deposition, um, uh,
in pregnancy because that's where uh polyunsaturated long chain
fatty acids are stored, and those are critical for
building fetal brains. You know, these are sort of
sound, biologically based, um, a kind of canonical evolutionary
psychological findings, similarly signs of secondary sex characteristics of
uh of of sexual maturity. So in men, you
know, a deeper voice, um, the presence of body
hair, square jawline. Um, uh, IN women, protuberant breasts
as well as that, um, gluteofemoral fat deposition, and
then, of course, signs of youth in women, um,
uh, indications that, um, uh, that a female at
the beginning of her reproductive career and hasn't had
many, many children and has, has, has few children,
um, ahead of her. Um, uh, ALL that is
very well studied and, you know, I think very
well documented. But the important thing is to note
that um that culture can do funny things where
it can emphasize or de-emphasize different aspects of that
basic palette, if you will, of, of possibilities. So,
um, although breasts are considered somewhat erotic from what
evidence we have and um uh by we, I'm
uh I'm not speaking for myself, but uh folks
like um uh William Jakoviak at the University of
Nevada, Las Vegas have studied this. You know that
that this is an aspect of female sexual attractiveness,
but in the United States at least, um, uh,
this particular, um, part of the body is Uh,
the technical term is hypercognized, meaning that our culture
pays a great deal of attention to this part
of the body, to the point that people have
surgery to modify, uh, this part of their body.
Um, uh, AND in fact, large breasts, although the,
the, the preferences in this regard, um, like, like
any, um, uh, uh, culturally determined feature can wax
and wane. So, um, uh, you know, the preferences
for total breast size. Change historically over time. But
nonetheless, this remains a part of the body that
uh Americans pay much more attention to in assessing
sexual attractiveness than do people in many other parts
of the world, right? So, we always want to
be careful um not to assume that the preferences
of individuals in any one society are a direct
You know, give us direct vision into or insight
into any universal aspect of aesthetic preferences in this
regard. Uh, AND that's why the kind of cross-cultural
work that I described before is so important, and,
and that has been done um with regard to
waist to hip ratio, for example, quite a number
of scholars, um, uh Lawrence Tukuyama and um uh
um uh uh. I'm blanking now, um, but, uh,
work has been done, um, in quite a number
of small scale societies, including, um, uh. Uh, THE
Hansa in Tanzania and so on, right? And, and
as I said, this seems to be a second
pass criterion in a number of places, um, uh,
so that's the kind of work that that nicely
illustrates the intersection of, of, of, of the influence
of culture and pan-human, um, biologically evolved psychology.
Changing topics now, how do you approach the study
of moral parochialism from an evolutionary perspective?
Right, so this is um work done with a
number of colleagues, um, uh. And I should say
here that we've done a number of studies, but
uh I would love to see this work picked
up by by other investigators anytime that, that, you
know, that you have um only one lab or
one group of researchers um producing a finding, you
really want to see it replicated um uh or
extended by other researchers. Um, uh, CERTAINLY the replication
crisis in science in general and in um uh
social psychology in particular, uh, underscores the importance of
that. So, um, I should, I'm, I'm qualifying what
I'm saying about moral parochialism because um the, the
total number of studies that we've done is not
large and, and the work hasn't been extensively replicated
by other investigators. That said, I have, you know,
fairly high confidence that the results are real. OK,
so what do we mean by moral parochialism? We
mean very simply that people's moral judgments, their judgments
about what they consider right and wrong from a
moral perspective. Um, ARE, are very much tied to
a local context. Um, AND what I mean by
that is not just that people are, um, are
ethnocentric and assuming that everyone should share their values,
although that is an important feature of, of human
cultural, um, uh, and biological co-evolution. Instead, what we
mean by moral parochialism is that uh the extent
to which people gauge an action as being wrong.
IS in part contingent on where it occurs, when
it occurs, and the extent to which an authority
of figure approves or disapproves of that action. Now,
why would this be the case? So what's the
background hypothesis here? The basic idea is that The
the function of moral judgment is to motivate individuals
in their own actions to conform to local norms.
In order to behave in a predictable fashion and
a reliable fashion that makes them a valuable potential
cooperative partner. So humans are enormously cooperative, far more
so than virtually any other species on the planet,
and that together with culture is what is responsible
for our success as a species, and that we're
so good at um at cooperating with unrelated individuals,
um. And uh the, the local rules, the norms,
the standards for behavior are are are one critical
part of the ability to cooperate in this way,
because it is only by being able to coordinate
our actions, right, and to rely on others to
act in the appropriate fashion um that we that
that's kind of cooperation as possible. So, If what
moral judgment is doing is guiding us as actors
to locally predictable behavior and motivating us to distance
ourselves from and or punish individuals who fail to
conform in this way, right? So, non-conformists at the
very least are unpredictable, right? If somebody doesn't follow
the local rules, you don't know how they're going
to act, and that makes them a bad cooperative
partner. That's at best, um, at worst, they may
be free riding and trying to take advantage of
others, right? And that really degrades cooperation quickly, right?
So, um, moral judgment is in the service of
motivating us to conform to the local rules and
motivating us to punish those who fail to conform
to the local rules. Cooperation is always going to
be local. It is the people around one who
form one's potential cooperative partners, and it is also
the people around one who can potentially exploit cooperation
for self-interested ends, right, the free riders, right? It's
only in, you know, this historically and evolutionarily unprecedented
information age that we live in right now that
I can be talking to you on the other
side of the planet, right? And we can potentially
cooperate, right? It's one of the things that that's
led to the enormous boom in scientific productivity is
that, you know, we could collaborate on a project,
right? We can go and do research even though
we're in, you know, opposite sides of the globe,
OK. That was never a part of our history
as a species. It's always, always the folks right
around one. So it's the folks right around one
that one needs to care about when it comes
to following the rules. It's their opinions of one
that matter in terms of integrating one into a
cooperative group, um, and, and it is the danger
of free riding or disruptive behavior, um, violence, what
have you, exploitation in the local group that matters.
So moral parochialism very simply is that we judge
an action to be more wrong when it happens
in our group near us right now, then when
it happens far away or long ago, right? Because
what happens far away and long ago really doesn't
concern us when it comes to the potential for
cooperation, right? Similarly, I mentioned social hierarchies before, right?
Um, All groups, even fairly egalitarian ones, have some
social hierarchy. There's some individuals who are more influential
than others, right? And of course, many, many groups
have formal offices with the ability to exert coercive
pressure through legitimate means, right? And Given that there's
always some social hierarchy, what the influential or powerful
individual says about how the rules should operate is
always going to matter because they're going to structure
the landscape for cooperation. So we've been able to
show in studies in a handful of small scale
societies and, and, and a few uh global North
societies that if you ask people about a moral
transgression, some action that, that everyone would consider wrong,
theft. Violence, murder, uh unprovoked, right? Um, uh. If
you frame it as it's occurring in your community
now. People think it is worse than if you
frame it as it happened someplace very far away.
If you frame it as happening in your community
now, people think it is worse than if it
happened long ago. And if you frame it as
disapproved by the local authority, people think it is,
I think of it as a worse transgression than
if you frame it as approved by the local
authority, right? And you know, Um, uh, viewers and
listeners can, can do the thought experiment themselves, right?
So I don't think that there is anybody watching
this program right now who would say slavery is
not that bad. Like, like, you know, be OK
if we had slaves now, right? This is, this
is obviously morally abhorrent. I'm, I'm quite confident that
everyone watching this would, would agree with me in
this regard. Well, um, you know, the ancient Greeks
had slaves, OK? How do you feel about slavery
in ancient Greece? You know, people say things like,
well, I mean they, they were instrumental in, you
know, inventing democracy, right? That is the sla the
moral evil that is slavery seems to pale. When
we think about ancient Greece compared to when we
think about the contemporary world, right? And that's not
an accident, that's because temporal and spatial distance are
basically saying this is less and less relevant to
who will cooperate or free ride in your local
group. So our moral judgment is parochial. It it
is, it is parochial because ultimately, it's in the
service of cooperation in the local group and policing
that cooperation.
Uh, WHEN do individuals resort to moral condemnation and
what role does contextual contingency play?
Yeah, so, um, this is basically, um, uh, an
extension of what I said just now, right, which
is that, um, uh, that the function of moral
condemnation is to signal multiple things, OK? It is
to signal that um one knows what the rules
are and one disapproves of rule violations, right? Um,
ONE is potentially willing to inflict costs on the
rule violator, or to endorse and assign prestige and
value to those who do inflict such costs, right?
And um, it's, it's role is to both advertise
one's value as a cooperator in the local group
and to Inflict costs on or signal the potential
to inflict costs on those who violate those rules.
And this is why context matters so much. Who
is that person? What is the context, what is
the nature of the violation? All of these things
are being processed by a psychology. Uh, THAT, that,
that is leading us to experience, um, what technically
we can call moral outrage or moral disgust versions
of emotions that um in their uh in their
Original ancestral trait, which are also present in humans,
are very much just about what's happening to me,
right? So anger is my response to a transgression,
a cost inflicted on me, that is an unwelcome
cost, right? So, when the baby is crying, if
it's My baby, I'm not angry. If it's the
baby in the, the row behind me on the,
you know, um, 12 hour airplane flight, now I'm
angry, right? Cause when my baby cries, it's inflicting
a cost on me, but it's a welcome cost,
right? I want to care for that, um, offspring,
right? When it's somebody else's baby, it's an unwelcome
cost. Simple. That's what anger is doing, motivates me
to take action to, to truncate the transgression. Um,
TO deter future transgressions and to advertise my, um,
uh, uh, uh, my ability to defend myself against
such transgressions to any would be, um, transgressors, right?
Very simple, right? So why do people get angry
about moral violations that have nothing to do with
them, right? Maybe um uh you're an an able-bodied
person and you see another able-bodied person park illegally
in a space reserved for handicapped individuals. OK. A
lot of people would be angered by that, right?
Some people would go over and challenge that individual
and say, hey, what are you doing? No park
there, right? Um, YOU know, that you don't need
that space. Leave that for people who need it,
right? We act as if, and we feel as
if the transgression against um somebody else, right, the
costs being inflicted on the individual who needs the
parking space, was actually being inflicted on us, OK?
That's the difference between moral outrage, anger elicited by
rule violations that do not affect us versus simple
anger, OK. And the fact that humans experience this
and, and the evidence that any other animal does
so is quite limited and and to the extent
that there is any evidence, it's only in these
highly encephalized species, um, uh, you know, with very
complex social behavior, it's very rudimentary and, and, and
I would say that evidence is quite thin. Um,
SO we can certainly say that more. Moral outrage
is a, is a, a canonical human characteristic and
possibly an entirely unique one. And that is because
of the importance of culture in regulating our behavior
and the importance of cooperation in our success, not
just success as as a species, natural selection acts
on individuals, not on, on populations this way, right?
Um, uh, BUT it is, you know, the ability
to be well integrated into one's group, to be
valued as a potential cooperator, to be able to
play in those reindeer games, right? To be able
to reap the rewards of cooperation. This is the
key to success in all societies, right? Um, uh,
AND so, um, uh, experiencing moral outrage when rule
violations occur, advertises that we understand the rules that
we're willing to inflict cost on on rule violators,
and thus that we are a reliable. Um, MEMBER
of the group and a good potential cooperator, um,
uh, and contextual contingency simply means, um, uh, the
context matters. If it happened far away, if it
happened long ago, it doesn't matter as much because
those individuals committing those transgressions might have been subject
to different rules. People say things like, well, you
know, things are different in ancient Greece, right? And
it was different, right? Like I, I don't know
what the rules were then, right? But even more
importantly, those people are long dead. It's not gonna,
there there there are no opportunities for me there,
OK? In addition, what this kind of outrage is
doing is it is. Um, uh, SIGNALING that one
is on the right side of the law, as
it were, right? So another feature of human, um,
social organization is that we have higher order punishment,
that is, we don't just punish people who break
the rules, we punish people who fail to punish
people who break the rules, OK? So, if you
say, you know, well, yeah, the, you know. The
guy in the house next door, turns out, was
a convicted pedophile, but, you know. Doesn't bother me.
He doesn't, I don't have any kids, not my
problem, OK. A lot of your other neighbors are
gonna say, you're a bad neighbor for tolerating the
presence. Of this morally outrageous action in in in
in the in the in in in the house
next door to yours, right? That is, we punish
people who failed to punish people who violate important
rules. And in so doing, um, uh, we, we
greatly increase the power of enforcement such that um
uh punishment, actual punishment doesn't have to happen anywhere
near as often. Um, AND so context again matters
and, you know. Tragically, and frankly, horrible things are
happening in the world as we speak right now.
As you and I sit safely in our offices
looking at computers, people are being murdered, raped, enslaved,
starved. Some of these things are in the news,
some of these things are not. But it's happening
right now, OK? Why are, why is everyone watching
this not constantly morally outraged? OK, cause it's not
happening. In their community OK, um, and that doesn't
mean that they are immoral individuals. It doesn't mean
that, that, you know, that that that that that
we, um, in any way. Um, uh, YOU know,
from our, from our sort of innate psychology would
condemn them for failing to condemn these actions abroad,
right? And one of the great successes of, of
human cultural evolution is our ability to embrace principles.
Outside of context, that is to do away with
contextual contingency and say, we should all be horrified
by those actions. We should all seek to punish
the people who engage in them. We should all
seek to protect the innocent, right? Even if it's
not happening here and now in our neighborhood, right?
And there's a constant, you know, there's a constant
tug of war or constant friction between Um, those
culturally evolved principles, cause that's evolutionarily novel, you know,
it's a product of cultural evolution to say more
rules should apply everywhere, um, uh, you know, we
should, we shouldn't value the life of, of someone
in our community any more than the life of
someone on the other side of the planet, right?
That, that's not part of our innate psychology at
all of our evolved psychology and um uh and
it's a struggle to um to work to to.
To embrace that in our own lives and to
persuade, you know, others in our community and and
policymakers to to embrace it also.
So I would like to get now into the
topic of this guests and pathogen avoidance. Uh, I've
had several interviews on the show already on the
topic of this guests from an evolutionary perspective, but
I would like to ask you specifically about ectoparasites.
I mean, what are ectoparasites and do they induce
these guests in the same way? I mean, what
kind of behavioral defenses do we have humans have
against ectoparasites?
Yeah, um, so, uh, a parasite, of course, is
any organism that gets its resources by exploiting another
organism. Uh, ECTO just means on the exterior versus
endo, which is the anterior. So an endoparasite is,
um, you know, an organism like a tapeworm, for
example, or a whipworm that lives in the gastrointestinal
tract. Um, AN ectoparasite is an organism like a
tick, a flea, a leech, a mosquito, um, uh,
all of which are, um, uh, getting their resources
from their hosts on the exterior of, of the
organism. Uh, AND, um, this is work done together
with uh Professor Tom Cooper at Nottingham Trent University.
Um, uh, WE reason that, um, that. Uh, THE
wonderful work that's been done by so many scholars,
uh, on the psychology of Disgust, and shout out
here to to Paul Rosin, the, the grandfather of
Disgust research, um, that work has really focused largely
on, um, on the subjective quality, the feeling states,
right, that are kind of canonically um associated with
the cues of the presence of pathogens, OK. So,
uh, the late Valerie Curtis, um, for example, uh,
nicely demonstrated that, um, Uh, in work that I
would like to see further replicated by the way,
but it has been replicated some, um, uh, that,
uh, things like vomit, feces, body products, right, um,
uh, you know, uh, odors of putrefaction, so that
the smell of things rotting, right? That these are,
these are dis discussed elicitors um around the world,
right? Uh, AND of course there's cultural variation there,
um, that's important to recognize, right? Um, uh. You
know, what, what is a delicious cheese to one
person, um, you know, smells like um uh feces
to another person, right? And the the the difference
is not their olfactory neurons, the difference is the
cultural meaning assigned to those odors. But in general,
um, there are universal stimuli, um, uh, so absent
the cheese context, that same odor, um, uh, uh,
you know, would, would elicit disgust, and that disgust
is defense against. Um, EXPOSURE to pathogens, OK, um,
and that defense is largely concentrated, um, on, uh,
the problem of contamination, so what is touching us,
and in particular what gets inside us, OK? Uh,
SO, um, the mouth, the oral pathway is particularly
privileged in pathogen avoidance disgust. And that's because we
have to eat, right? That is, the, the, the
mouth is one of the principal ways that stuff
outside the body gets inside the body, and our
immune system actually treats material that comes in through
the mouth more um uh permissively than material that
might enter the body through other pathways, because if
that didn't happen, it's called oral tolerance. We don't
mount an immune response, right, um, uh, to a
lot of stuff that comes in through the mouth
because if that didn't happen, we develop food allergies
all the time, right? Um, uh, AND wouldn't be
able to eat anything in the end. We'd constantly
be identifying this as foreign material, OK. So, um,
uh, this oral pathway and, and secondary to the
oral pathway, other orifices, uh, Kevin Haley and I,
uh, years ago published a paper showing that um
uh the surface of the body is where, uh,
that is the interface between the environment and the.
Self is where uh disgust is concentrated, but the
orifices are, are particularly, so, you know, um, poop
that splashes on your wall is less disgusting that
poop that splashes on your clothes and poop that
splashes on your skin is more disgusting than poop
that splashes on your. Your, your, your clothes, but
poop that gets in your eye um uh uh
uh is is more disgusting than poop that lands
on your wrist, right? Um, uh, AND that's because
any orifice is a potential way for pathogens, microorganisms
to get inside the body. Enormous work on pathogen
avoidance discussed very important work. I, I, I mentioned,
you know, just a tiny sliver of it, including
some of our contributions, but there are many, many,
many, you know, really, really productive scholars working in
this space. Um, SHOUT out to uh Joshua Tiber
in particular who's really um done a lot of
seminal work in this area. Um, uh, THE contribution
that, um, Tom Cooper and I want to make
is to say, The, the predominance of that set
of stimuli and those kinds of responses. So what
are the responses, you know, the loss of appetite.
So if you're in the presence of a pathogen
stimulus, you, you stop wanting to take things in
through the mouth. Makes sense given what I said
about oral tolerance. Um, uh, AT the extreme, um,
uh, you may vomit, right? So that if there's
a possibility you've ingested something, now you expel it,
right? Those responses are so compelling and so central
to the experience of disgust. The disgust research has,
has, um, largely overlooked another threat which disgust also
guards against, and that is not pathogens, but ectoparasites.
That is, these, you know, macroorganisms, fleas, ticks, lice,
um, mosquitoes. Um, uh, LEECHES and so on, right,
um, uh, which prey on the host on the
surface, OK? Um, AND, um, uh, ectoparasites are a
really significant source of selective pressure. Um, WE who
are privileged to, to, you know, to live in
uh highly economically developed societies are, you know, Prone
to underestimate the importance of ectoparasites in evolution because
um they're a nuisance for us, but they aren't
a threat to our well-being, right? So, you know,
you might have mosquitoes in your backyard or your,
you know, um uh when you go into the
into the woods for a walk, and that's irritating,
right? Um, uh, THEY bite you, you might be
a little bit worried about them. But um if
we look across species, what we see is that,
you know, fertility declines as a function of ectoparasitism
because they're sucking, quite literally sucking resources from their
host. And of course they can also be vectors
for disease, and in the extreme, they can actually
kill the animal just by taking so many of
its resources. OK. Um, SO, uh. Our argument, um,
uh, Tom Cooper's in mind is that the, the
kind of looking under the lamppost that disgust, looking
at the really salient, prominent features of disgust in
terms of pathogen avoidance, has led investigators to overlook
this other important selective pressure, this other threat that
disgust also defends against, and that is Presence of
um uh uh uh uh of a threat from,
uh, you know, creatures that prey on the surface
of our bodies in this way. Now, um, you
might have felt a little bit itchy as we,
as we've been talking because I've been doing this
kind of thing quite a lot. This is intentional.
Scratching is contagious, OK. Um, IF you see somebody
else scratch, your skin will start to itch, um,
uh, and, and you will start to feel the
desire to scratch also. OK. Why, why? What's going
on there? Well, if I'm scratching, that's a cue
that I may be exposed to ectoparasites, and if
you're in my immediate vicinity, again, digital technology is
evolutionarily novel, right? Um, IF you're in my immediate
vicinity, that means you're at risk of the same
ectoparasites, either me transferring them to you, right? Uh,
OR they're just, you know, uh, ubiquitous in our
local environment. And so by up regulating the sensitivity
of your skin to the possibility of uh of
invasion in this fashion, um, uh, scratching, of course,
is trying to remove that parasite, get it off
me, right? Um, uh, AND itch is the subjective
sensation that motivates that behavior. Scratching is contagious because
um uh the attention is a limited resource, and
when there are cues that you need to be
attending to one particular threat, attention gets channeled to
that um uh modality, and in this case it
is the cutaneous sensations, the sensations on our skin,
right? Similarly, for example, um uh um many viewers
might have had the experience that, um, Uh, they,
they, they wake up in the morning and find
that they've scratched themselves. Perhaps they've they've pulled a
scab off and it's bleeding a little bit or
something like that, right? Um, uh. Uh, I'm Uh,
perhaps not my sharpest right now because, uh, my
dog was up at 3 a.m., um, shaking his
head over and over again cause it turned out,
uh, he's got a bit of a yeast infection
in one ear that I need to treat, OK.
Um, uh. The itch sensation is actually up regulated
when we're asleep. That is, we experience itch more
easily when we're asleep than when we're awake. And
as a consequence of this, we may scratch ourselves
more um in our semi-conscious state, to the point
even of, you know, creating a small lesion. OK.
Why, why does itch sensation increase at night? Why
that is, why does the threshold for us to
experience that sensation um go down? And the answer
is because when we're asleep, we're much more vulnerable
to ectoparasites, right? Because we can't see them. Uh,
uh, WE'RE immobile, so it's easier for them to
reach us. Bedbugs, of course, um, you know, uh,
a significant problem in, in some hotel chains and
so on, right? Um, BEDBUGS have evolved specifically to
take advantage of the fact that, you know, we're
diurnal and we, we are immobile at night. Um,
uh, SO, um, these are just some of the
ways that Uh, uh, Cooper and I see evidence
of evolved design for defense against ectoparasites, right? Now,
in particular, when you show people, you know, stimuli
that that. Um, uh, REVEAL the presence of an
ectoparasite, a film of a scalp infested with lice,
for example, right? People say that's disgusting when they're
speaking English and, and when they're speaking other languages,
um, they use, um, you know, readily translatable terms,
right? Um, IMPORTANTLY, however, um, It isn't the same
disgust. It overlaps with the the oral gastric disgust
that I've described earlier, that is a defense against
pathogens, but it isn't identical. And um uh Tom
Cooper and I, together with a number of colleagues,
have demonstrated this um uh uh both in the
United States, um, in China, and in a, in
an unpublished paper which we hope to bring to
market soon in quite a number of societies, um,
uh, that. If you ask people about their bodily
sensations, and you show them either stimuli of the
presence of ectoparasites or stimuli of cues of the
risk of pathogens. They may use the same word
to describe both as disgusting, but if you ask
them about their bodies, they describe more of those
cutaneous sensations, right, when they see the ectoparasites, and
more of the oral gastric sensations when they see
the cues of pathogens, OK. Now why is the
same word disgust being used for both of these?
Well, they report some of the oral gastric symptoms
when they see the ectoparasites. There is overlap between
these and and and the reason that overlap probably
occurs is because basically, real estate is valuable. So
there's a limited amount of brain tissue, and what's
called neural reuse is basically um applying the same
neural network. For with slight variation for different adaptive
problems. OK. So, um, there is probably, and this
is conjecture, but I, I think it's, it's grounded
conjecture. There's, there's overlap in the sensations of disgust
that one experiences between um reactions to pathogen cues
and ectoparasite cues. Because the same architecture is being
used largely for both of them. Now why would
that be the case? Because the defense against both
is get it off me, get it away from
me, OK, right? I don't want to be splashed
with a poop. I don't want to have the
ticks crawling on me. Get it off me, right?
Of, away, back away, OK? It's not a fear
response, right? I, I see a lion. Right? This
is a thing that can jump on me and
kill me right away, OK? I, I, I need
to be in fight or flight mode. I don't
need to be in fight or flight mode when
I see leeches. They don't move very fast, right?
You know, they, they, I can see them coming,
OK, right? Um, WHAT I need to be is
back away, OK, back away and get it off
me. If I see the leech, you know, crawling
along my skin, getting ready to, you know, to
bite me, get it off me, OK. So that
distancing and decontamination if you will, is the same
functional response. The loss of appetite is only functional
in one context, that is the risk of pathogens
and not in the other, but the overlap in
terms of the back away, get it off me
response is sufficient that the same architecture is probably
being used for both, OK.
Right. So let me ask you now about the
link between pathogen of violence and politics. So what
does pathogen of violence have to do with political
and social conservatism?
Yeah, so this is not an area yous have
probably realized by now that I keep saying the
same thing over and over again, which is a
little bit of work here, but I haven't done
a lot. I'm kind of a jack of all
trades and a master of none. Um, I, I,
you know, there are a few things that I
can speak to, um, with some authority. Um, uh,
Colin Holbrook and I have done, I think, I
think we have 17 different papers on. Um, REPRESENTATIONS
of formidability. I'm pretty confident that's a real effect,
right? I'm pretty confident in, in, in that hypothesis
and, and the data that we have. I'd like
to see it replicated more by other groups, as
I said, but yeah, we got a lot of
data on that one, right? Um, I, I, I'm
something of a, uh, you know, a novice or
a dilettan when it comes to political psychology, um,
uh, but, um. Uh, AND here my former graduate
student, um, uh Theo Seymour has, uh, really done
quite a lot more work in the area of
political psychology than I have, um, but, uh. There's
a body of work out there by political psychologists
and political scientists. I should say that this is
contested. There have been um uh negative results, um,
and the debate is ongoing. So, so one shouldn't
take this as a, as a, you know, an
extremely well documented pattern, but um I, I, I,
I find it. Compelling enough to, um, you know,
to, uh, at least employ the hypothesis and the
and and the premise, uh, and, and, um, uh,
you know, more evidence is needed as always. So,
so what is the basic idea here that the
basic idea is that, um, social conservativism, so, so
conservative and liberal are, you know. Political orientation terms
that really mean different things in in in different
nation states and maybe even in different communities, right?
Um, uh, HERE in the United States, um, uh,
there's been sort of historically a a sort of
marriage of strange bedfellows between economic conservatism, that is
individuals who want um lower taxes, um uh and
um uh more room for private capital and investment.
And social conservativism, which is individuals who want um
to uh adhere to what they believe to be
long standing traditions, OK. So we want to be
careful not to use, and the same is true
with regard to economic liberalism and and social liberalism.
They're a little more closely tied, but, but conservative
and liberal in France, for example, means the the
the the the parameters are different than they are
in the United States, so we don't want to
just take those words for granted. But the basic
argument is that it seems to be, and as
I said, that the evidence is the jury is
still out on this, the evidence is contested, um,
uh, but there there's some evidence that Um, that
social conservatives are more reactive to threats than social
liberals are, meaning that they attend to threats more,
um, uh, they, they, they tend to have, um,
uh, greater memory for threats. They tend to react
more strongly to, um, to, to threats or possible
threats, right? THAN social liberals do. We also want
to be careful that, um, you know, we don't
want to take either ends of that spectrum as
the reference point, the normal as it were, right?
So when we're talking about social conservatives have more
of this, we could just as easily say social
liberals have less of this, right? Um, uh, um,
uh, CERTAINLY doesn't want to pathologize anyone on the
basis of their political orientations, right? Um, uh. Now,
why might there be a connection between threat reactivity
and social conservatism slash social liberalism, depending where you
are in that scale, right? Um. One possibility is
that um if you see the world as more
dangerous, then um uh this is a bad time
as it were to to experiment with new forms
of social order, right? Instead, what you want to
be doing right now is sticking to the tried
and true, right? It worked for the previous generations,
we should do the same thing now. Now is
not the time, right, to to start uh trying
new things. On the other hand, if you see
the world as, you know, safe, there aren't a
lot of dangers around you. Well, let's let's experiment.
Let's try new ways of doing things and see
if we can improve society, right? SEE if we
can um uh solve some of the ills that
we see around us, right? Um, SO, uh, you
know, at least conceptually it makes sense that there
would be a link between um conservatism slash liberalism
in the social domain and the perception of the
world as dangerous or relatively safe, right? And um.
Uh, PATHOGEN. Disgust is simply one defense against one
category of threat, right? And so, um, uh, we
can expect that um that Discussed in this manner
will be marshaled more in terms of threat, right?
In in the rhetoric of social conservatives than social
liberals. Here it's important to point out, and I
alluded to this earlier, right? In addition to disgust
being a response to pathogen cues to ectoparasite cues,
I also mentioned moral disgust, right? And moral disgust
is is discussed in response to rule violations. OK,
now there is a lot of debate about whether
any rule can be viewed with moral disgust or
whether when people say that they actually mean something
like moral outrage and they're just using the words
polysimously, um, uh, um, but, uh, moral disgust. That
is a discussed reaction to a rule violation makes
sense from an uh a co-evolutionary perspective looking at
cultural evolution, biological evolution, because distancing yourself from a
rule violator as if they were contaminating, as if
they had disease or parasites, right? It's both as
a way of punishing them because you're removing yourself
from the opportunity of, you know, cooperating with them,
being exploited by them, and so on, right? And
you are signaling to others that you disapprove of
their behavior, right? Um, AND thus avoiding higher order
punishment yourself, right? And it's relatively low cost compared
to moral outrage if you think about it, right?
If you're, if you're disgusted by the able-bodied person
who parks in the handicapped space, you turn your
back on them, you walk away from them. If
you're outraged, you might go up and yell in
their face, right? And now you might get punched,
right? So, so, so, you know, ostracism is cheaper
than um a direct infliction of cost on the
transgressor. So, um, disgust seems to operate in the
moral domain, um, uh, just like anger operates in
the moral domain in in this way, right? And
um. If we look at political rhetoric, Um, what
we see, you know, at least anecdotally, I, and
I'm not sure if people have, you know, if
sociolinguists, for example, have studied this extensively, I don't
know, but, um, but at least anecdotally we see
social conservatives using um the rhetoric of disgust to
describe threats of contamination or um uh. Uh, Sexual
deviation from the norm, right? Sexual disgust is another
domain, um, uh, entirely separate from pathogen and ectoparasite
disgust, um. Uh, WHERE the, the emotion is motivating
the avoidance of suboptimal reproductive partners. Um, uh, uh,
ONE sees the language of contamination. The language of
um sexual deviation, excuse me, just a minute. Um,
BEING used by social conservatives, it's very prominent in
contemporary American political rhetoric right now as we speak,
um, uh, whereas, um, the language of moral disgust
might be more prominent in, in, um, the rhetoric
of social liberals, right? Um, uh, AND that's consistent
with, um, uh, sexual disgust and pathogen disgust, um,
being more closely tied to threats, particularly pathogen disgust.
Um, AS opposed to moral disgust where it is
the, the set of rules, the abstractions, um, that
are that are being threatened rather than any direct
imminent harm, right? So, um, uh. You know, around
the world tragically, uh, you know, the 21st century
is, is witness to an enormous resurgence in xenophobia,
um, uh, um, you know, brought about in part
by the large migration flows which, um, which war,
violence, deprivation and economic inequality have have spurred, right?
Um, AND that xenophobia often is couched in in
the language of outsiders being a threat, right? And,
and, um, Quite commonly, the threat is seen both
as the threat of violence, um, and the threat
of disease, right? Um, OR of um uh the,
the intersection of sexuality and violence, right? So. Um,
uh, uh, YOU know, those outsiders, they are, um,
you know, they're bringing disease into our country. They're,
um, uh, they, they, they're, you know, they're, they're
posing a threat to, um, you know, the innocence
in our society and so on, right? Um. And
that language often resonates more strongly with social conservatives
than it does with social liberals because their starting
point is a premise that the world is more
dangerous. But as I said, that the actual political
psychology evidence as to whether social conservatives are more
threat reactive than social liberals, this is an area
of ongoing debate. In our own research we have
found evidence supportive of that, but um we're just,
you know, a tiny drop in the bucket.
Right. So I have one last question then, and
still on the topic of pathogen avoidance. What explains
the different reactions of liberals and conservatives to the
COVID-19 pandemic? Does it have anything to do with
what we've just been talking about?
Yeah, these things are related and, and here this
is really um Theodore Seymour's work. This was the,
the, the, the, the principal components of his doctoral
dissertation and it's work that he continues to do
today, um looking at uh this relationship between political
orientation and reactions to threat. Um, AND based on
what I just said about, uh, you know, social
conservatives being more threat reactive than social liberals and
about, um, you know, pathogen disgust being, uh, a
prominent in political rhetoric on the right, um, you
would think that here in the United States, it
would have been the social conservatives who were, um,
you know, who were up in arms about the
possibility of a pandemic, and then when the pandemic
arrived, who would have been the most stringent in
embracing and Um, uh, enforcing the, the rules designed
to limit the spread of disease and in fact,
of course, the opposite occurred, right? So, um, uh,
when you look at a population level, um, uh,
the, the push back against public health measures, um,
was strongest in socially conservative areas. Um, AND the,
the, um, you know, the following of those public
health regulations and mandates was, was more consistent in
socially liberal areas and tragically, um, the result was
differences in per capita mortality, right? So, um, you
know, we, we know, um, on a, on a
county by county basis, um. Uh, YOU know, how
people vote, right? That's all public information in the
United States, and we can see that and we
know as a consequence, you know, where social conservatives
are, where social liberals are, and we know what
the, the, the, the, the mortality rates due to
COVID-19 were, right? And any casual observer of politics
in the United States would this wouldn't surprise them,
right, because they the push back against the public
health measures was was vociferous and prominent from social
conservatives. So why did this happen? Is, is the
basic theory wrong or is the world more complicated?
Um, AND the answer is the second, um. So
When Theos Amo looked more carefully in the United
States. Because Liberal and social liberal and social conservative
are simply poles on a spectrum, right? And certainly
political party affiliation is not isomorphic with those polls
on the spectrum, right. Um, When um uh Theo
looked more carefully at um Democrats, people who supported
the Democratic Party in um uh US elections. And
measured their political orientation, not on the basis of
their party affiliation, but on the basis of their
views on a variety of social issues, things like
abortion and gay marriage, and so on, right? What
he saw was that The socially conservative Democrats. Took
more COVID-19 prophylactic precautions, right? So they, they, they
took more behavioral measures to avoid the possibility of
um contracting the disease, then did more socially liberal
Democrats. So within the Democratic Party. The prediction holds
Well, Sorry, talking for over an hour now. Um.
No problem.
Um. So what's going on with individuals who voted
for Republican candidates and self-identify as members of the
Republican Party? What what what's happening there? And the
answer is they are threat reactive. Um, THEY'RE just
responding to different threats in part because those, um,
uh, the, the situation was framed for them by
prominent leaders of their political party and influential individuals
in their social circles. The threats were were framed.
Not in terms of the threat of disease. That
threat was downplayed, um, right? It was downplayed um
from the White House. It was downplayed by, you
know, Um, socially conservative media influencers. Um, OH, it's
not that big a deal, you know, it's gonna
pass soon. Uh, IT'S no worse than the flu.
Um, YOU know, I choose not to wear a
mask. These are all things that we heard from
um from leaders and prominent voices on the right.
Um, And we didn't hear, uh, you know, They
don't have enough um. Space in the morgue in,
you know, in New York, they, they have, you
know, refrigerated trucks parked outside the hospitals because people
are dying. At such high rates that um they
simply can't keep the bodies um uh anywhere, right?
I mean, and those were not the the um
the messages that were being promulgated on the right.
Instead, the message that that we're being disseminated were,
this is a threat to your civil liberties, right?
Um, THESE people are trying to stop you from
exercising your rights, importantly, including Um, the right of
assembly, the right to gather, and, and the right
to worship. And those are threats, right? Um, YOU,
you know, your, your basic rights are being infringed
upon, right? Um, AND These public health mandates were
framed in terms of um. Uh, uh, AN excuse
being used by people on the left to try
and regulate social behavior and and move the country
toward a socialist orientation in which the government um
uh plays a much larger role in people's lives.
And they were very real. You might say that's
a very debatable proposition and in fact the people
promulgating those um public health measures didn't have any
such political agenda. I think that's where the facts
probably lie, but um but what is incontestable is
that the public health measures inflicted real economic costs
on many people, right? The loss of their livelihoods.
Many small businesses went out of went out of
business entirely. It's still the case here in Los
Angeles that um There are areas that were once,
you know, booming small business locations where they're empty
storefronts now, right? Those, those, those places disappeared during
the pandemic and they and they haven't come back,
right? Restaurants, for example, um, you know, took an
enormous hit. So there's a very real economic cost
to this and so when voices on the right
are framing this in terms of socialism, um, you
know, that might be a misconstrual of the situation,
but when they're framing it in terms of, um,
you know, an economic threat, that's very real. So
What Theo found was that It's not that Individuals
who self-identified as Republican were not reactive to threats.
It's that they were reactive to a different set
of threats than than the disease threats, because that
was the way that the the pandemic was being
framed for them. Subsequently, um uh uh Theo headed
a project up looking around the world at behaviors
um uh uh disease avoidance behaviors during the pandemic.
And here because conservative liberal is, as I said,
very much, you know, um, local in terms of
what it means, right, you know, different, different political
systems, different value systems, different countries, right? So so
conservative and and liberal or maybe not the best
terms instead, um, Theo looked at traditionalism, right? So
how much do you think we should embrace. The
ways that we imagine life was run in the
past versus experiment with new social forms, which is
really a a broader Conceptual basis than the conservative
liberal divide and and what Theo found around the
world is is um that uh the the the
basic theory is supported that people who are more
oriented to to tradition. Took more steps to avoid
COVID-19 than people who are less oriented to tradition,
consistent with the idea that the orientation of the
past is a reflection of a desire for security
in a world that one sees as dangerous and
that the willingness to experiment is a reflection of
um a view that the world is a relatively
safe place and we can try new things, right?
So overall, the basic thesis is supported. The United
States is kind of an outlier in this and
and and really. In part that's because of, uh,
you know, our own unique history, but in part
it's because of the way that the situation was
framed by prominent voices on the right.
Great, so Doctor Fessler, just before we go, would
you like to tell people where they can find
your work on the internet?
Sure, um, they can just Google my name, Daniel
Fessler, um, uh, uh, I have a personal website,
pretty sure the URL is danielmtfesler.com, but um, you
have to check on that. I don't look at
my own website very much, um. Uh, I'm easy
to find and I'm a big believer in open
science. Um, I, I think, you know, while the
information age has brought us many ills, um, one
of the things that it really has the potential
to do is democratize knowledge, you know, I thank
you for the opportunity to talk to you and
and your viewers and, and share knowledge this way
and speculation, conjecture conjecture also. But, uh, everything I
published is on my website, so, um, folks can
find it there. Um, GO to my personal website,
um. Nice picture of the Santa Monica Mountains in
the background.
I will leave a link to it in the
description of the interview and thank you so much
for taking the time to come on the show.
It's been a pleasure to talk with you.
Absolutely, thank you for the opportunity and, and, and,
and thanks to folks watching um for their attention,
um, and, uh, and for their, you know, deep
thoughts about these issues. I think, um, you know,
there's a lot of information out there, there's a
lot of misinformation out there being a critical consumer
is really important.
Yeah. Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview
until the end. If you liked it, please share
it, leave a like and hit the subscription button.
The show is brought to you by Nights Learning
and Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com
and also please consider supporting the show on Patreon
or PayPal. I would also like to give a
huge thank you to my main patrons and PayPal
supporters Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyches
Olaf, Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim
Hollis, Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then
the Mari Robert Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Nes calling in
Holbrook field governor Michael Stormir, Samuel Andre Francis Forti
Agnsergoro and Hal Herzognun Macha Joan Labray and Samuel
Corriere, Heinz, Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France
David Sloan Wilson, asilla dearaurumen Roach Diego London Correa.
Yannick Punter Darusmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale
back medicine, Gary Galman Sam of Zallirianeioltonin John Barboza,
Julian Price, Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fre Franca
Bartolotti Gabrielon Scorteseus Slelitsky, Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani
Smith John Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau,
Luke Lovai Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wozin, David
Williams, Diocosta, Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie
Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior,
old Erringbo. Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Gray,
Zigoren, Jeff McMann, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell,
Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Storry, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin
Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman.
George Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander
Aubert, Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John
Nertner, Ursula Gudinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff, Sean Nelson,
Mike Levin, and Jos Net. A special thanks to
my producers. These are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffik,
Tom Venneden, Bernardin Curtis Dixon, Benedict Muller, Thomas Trumbull,
Catherine and Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz
and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers Matthew
Levender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivas, and Rosie. Thank you
for all.